
A SCHIZOANALYTIC READING OF BAUDELAIRE:
THE MODERNIST AS POSTMODERNIST

by

EUGENE W. HOLLAND
Department of French Language and Literature
The Ohio State University
eugeneh@humanities1.cohums.ohio-state.edu

_Postmodern Culture_ v.4 n.1 (September, 1993)
pmc@unity.ncsu.edu

Copyright (c) 1993 by Eugene W. Holland, all rights
reserved.  This text may be used and shared in
accordance with the fair-use provisions of U.S.
copyright law, and it may be archived and redistributed
in electronic form, provided that the editors are
notified and no fee is charged for access.  Archiving,
redistribution, or republication of this text on other
terms, in any medium, requires the consent of the
author and the notification of the publisher, Oxford
University Press.



[1]       Whether Deleuze and Guattari were actually "doing 
philosophy" in the _Anti-Oedipus_ or not, their last 
collaborative work (_Qu'est-ce que la philosophie?_) may 
shed some light on the status of the concepts operating in 
that early work.^1^  Unlike scientific concepts, which aim 
to stabilize and identify specific domains within the real, 
philosophical concepts operate according to Deleuze and 
Guattari as what we might call "transformers": they 
intervene in established philosophical problematics in order
to de-stabilize them, reworking old concepts and forging new
connections among the distinctive features composing 
them.^2^  What is distinctive about the _Anti-Oedipus_, in 
this light (and perhaps this is what makes its mode of 
intervention seem more than just philosophical), is that its
de-stabilization of established problematics involves making
new connections *with historical context*, as well as re-
aligning concepts into new constellations.^3^  A term such 
as "de-coding," then, will best be understood not in terms 
of any content of its own, but in relation to the concepts 
it transforms in the course of producing schizoanalysis out 
of the problematics of historical materialism and 
psychoanalysis in the wake of the events of 1968 in France, 
and--for the purposes of this essay--how it illuminates 
the transformative force of the works of that great 19th-
century figure of transition, Charles Baudelaire.^4^  My aim
here will thus be not so much to explain what de-coding 
means as to show how it works and what it can do in 
the way of textual and socio-historical analysis of 
Baudelaire. 

[2]       Since concepts as transformers intervene in other 
contexts instead of governing domains of their own, they 
have no independent, autonomous content, and depend instead 
on their use for whatever content we can ascribe to them.  
In other words, what makes philosophical concepts "user-
friendly" for Deleuze and Guattari is also what makes them 
so challenging: they are strategically underdetermined, 
and thus only take shape--to borrow one of Deleuze's 
favorite polyvocal expressions--"au milieu": *in context* 
and *in between* their point of departure and a point of 
arrival or connection with some other phenomenon or 
event.^5^  Connecting schizoanalysis with Baudelaire for one
thing endows the notion of de-coding with features--
notably the linguistic or rhetorical tools of metaphor and 
metonymy for close analysis of poetic texts--it does not 
obviously possess in the _Anti-Oedipus_ itself; and at the 
same time it in turn situates the evolution of Baudelairean 
poetics in the broader cultural and historical context of 
the emergence of market society, which is ultimately 
responsible for de-coding in the first place.  The de-coding
of modernism in Baudelaire will, in this context, turn out
to be not only what happens to an earlier romanticism he
puts behind him with the invention of modernism, but also
what happens to that modernism itself, especially in the
late prose poems.  By repositioning Baudelaire in relation
to and somehow already beyond the very modernism he
contributed so much to inventing, a schizoanalytic reading
can help situate Baudelaire in postmodern context.  But
first, a few words about de-coding. 

[3]       De-coding is, in the first place, Deleuze and 
Guattari's translation into semiotic terms of the concepts
of rationalization and reification, by which Weber and
Lukacs designated the historical replacement of meaning by
abstract calculation as the basis of social order.  More in
agreement with Lukacs than with Weber, they explain this
process as a function of the capitalist market and the
predominance of exchange-value.  To be more specific,
de-coding is linked to axiomatization, the process central
to capitalism whereby streams of quantified factors of
production (such as raw materials, skills, and knowledges)
are conjoined in order to extract a differential surplus;
de-coding both supports and results from axiomatization,
transforming meaningful qualities into calculable
quantities.  Deleuze and Guattari disagree radically with
both Weber and Lukacs, however, in considering de-coding not
as sterile disenchantment or hopeless fragmentation, but as
the *positive* moment in the dialectic of capitalist
development: as the potential for freedom and permanent
revolution, opposed by the forces of re-coding and
capitalist authoritarianism. 

[4]       At the same time, however, that de-coding transforms 
rationalization and reification into semiotic terms, it 
translates the semiotics of Lacanian psychoanalysis into 
historical terms.  Of central importance here is the pair of
concepts that parallel de-coding and re-coding in the _Anti-
Oedipus_: de-territorialization and re-territorialization.  
Derived from Lacanian usage--where "territorialization" 
designates the mapping of the infant's polymorphous 
erogenous zones by parental care-giving--these terms come 
to designate a crucial dynamic of the capitalist market: the
disconnection and reconnection of bodies and environments 
(e.g. the disconnection of peasants from common land by the 
Enclosure Acts in England, and their re-territorialization 
as wage-labor onto textile looms in the nascent garment 
industry).  The primary difference between these parallel 
conceptual pairs is that de-territorialization and re-
territorialization operate on physical bodies and involve 
material investments of energy (as in production and 
consumption), while de-coding and re-coding operate on 
symbolic representations and involve investments of mental 
energy (as in cognition and fantasy).  This dual 
transformation of concepts serves to hinge together labor-
power and libido (called social and desiring production in 
the _Anti-Oedipus_), and produces a revolutionary 
historical-materialist-semiotic psychiatry: schizoanalysis. 
I should note that the distinction between material and 
symbolic investments virtually disappears in Deleuze and 
Guattari's later works.  But the benefits of retaining the 
term "de-coding"--for cultural and literary studies at 
least--are threefold: it designates semiotic processes 
that are legible as such in texts and cultural artifacts; it
construes those semiotic processes in psychoanalytic or 
psychodynamic terms (following Lacan); and it at the same 
time connects both texts and psychodynamics with history and
political economy--attributing them ultimately to the 
spread of the market and the rhythms of capitalist 
development. 

[5]       The translation of Lacanian psychoanalysis into 
historical materialist terms depends on an ambiguity 
inherited from Levi-Strauss as to the status of the 
Symbolic Order--an ambiguity crucial to Lacanian therapy: is
the "Symbolic Order" a purely abstract, logical structure,
or is it historical and concrete?  For Deleuze and Guattari,
the answer is clear: the Symbolic Order is historical; it is
the actual ensemble of codes governing meaning and action in
a given social formation.  But for Lacanian therapy, the 
Symbolic Order entails the following paradox: On one hand, 
the Symbolic Order is the basis of human identity-formation:
in saying "I" and accepting a proper name derived from the 
Name-of-the-Father, the organism becomes a human subject 
spoken by the language-system, forever alienated from his or
her "true" pre-linguistic being and dependent for any sense 
of self on the Symbolic Other.  On the other hand, the 
Symbolic Order is an illusion, and the Symbolic Other is not
a person but a *place*: the place occupied by the "%sujet-
suppose-savoir%" (the subject who is presumed to know, to 
possess authoritative knowledge)--and this is an *empty* 
place, occupied by the Lacanian therapist only in order to 
refuse the imputation and indeed deny the very possibility 
of such knowledge and authority.  To put this paradox in 
other terms, the Symbolic Order is lived in two different 
registers: from the perspective of the Imaginary 
register, the Symbolic Order is centered on and governed by 
a Symbolic Other who possesses the phallus as sign of 
authority and from whom the individual derives his or her 
sense of fixed identity and meaning; from the perspective of
the Symbolic register, the Symbolic Order is a realm of 
fluid rather than fixed identities, the phallus is a sign of
infinite semiosis rather than of stable meaning, and the 
Other is a fictional persona in an empty place.  Following 
Lacan, Deleuze and Guattari designate the Symbolic 
register's radically fluid form of semiosis free from 
identity-fixations as "schizophrenia"--but they will 
ultimately locate and define it historically rather than 
clinically. 

[6]       For although they acknowledge the radical implications 
this paradox of the Symbolic perspective on the Symbolic 
Order entails *for therapy*, Deleuze and Guattari 
nonetheless insist that it has specific *historical 
conditions of possibility*.  And insisting that the Symbolic
Order is historical means exposing it irrevocably to 
difference, contingency, and change: by examining different 
social formations (in Part III of the _Anti-Oedipus_), they 
are able to show that the fiction of a centered Symbolic 
*Order* belongs to another, older social formation based on 
stable codes, and that capitalism by contrast thrives on and
indeed fosters through de-coding the meaningless and 
identity-free "schizophrenic" semiosis characteristic of the
Symbolic register; hence the subtitle of the _Anti-
Oedipus_: _Capitalism and Schizophrenia_.  The intervention
of de-coding in Lacanian psychoanalysis thus transforms a 
paradox lying at the heart of radical therapy into a 
recognition of historical difference, and produces the 
strong claim that the Lacanian perspective is *made 
possible* by market de-coding under capitalism. 

[7]       The crux of that historical difference is this: Social 
relations in a coded Symbolic Order are qualitative and 
significant: women in tribal societies, for example, are 
valued as the source of life and the very cornerstone of 
meta-familial social relations in a kinship system fully 
charged with symbolic meanings.  The basic social relations 
in the de-coded Symbolic order of capitalism, by contrast, 
are quantitative and strictly meaningless: workers (of 
whatever gender) are equated as abstract, calculable amounts
of labor-power within the cash nexus of the market.  In this
regard (though without using the term de-coding, of course),
Marx had already discerned an illuminating parallel between 
Martin Luther and Adam Smith: for Luther, the essence of 
religion was not found in objects of religious devotion, but
in subjective religiosity in general; and for Smith, the 
essence of wealth was not found in objects of economic 
value, but in abstract productive activity in general.  And 
Smith's insight, Marx argues, was made possible by the 
practice under capitalism of measuring value in terms of 
abstract labor-power.  

[8]       To this parallel, Deleuze and Guattari add a third
term: Sigmund Freud, whom they call "the Luther and the Adam
Smith of psychiatry."^6^  For Freud, the essence of
libidinal value is found not in the objects of desire, but
in desire itself as an abstract subjective essence, as
objectively-*under*determined, de-coded libido.  Freud's
insight, too, Deleuze and Guattari argue, was made possible
dialectically by the capitalist subsumption of all social
relations under the market and exchange-value--except the
relations of reproduction, which restrict desire to the
abstract poles of the nuclear family.  So between the
extremes of Daddy as Oedipal agent of castration and object
of identification and Mommy as forbidden object of desire,
market de-coding makes "all that is solid melt into air," as
Marx put it: the market "mobilizes" desire, in other words,
by freeing it from capture by any stable, all-embracing
code--only to recapture it, it must be said, via the
re-coding of advertising, for example, which
re-territorializes it onto the objects of the latest
administered consumer fad.^7^  

[9]       Within the framework of psychoanalysis, meanwhile,
Lacan takes the de-coding of desire one important step
further than Freud: it is not the actual persons of Mommy
and Daddy that shape desire in the family, but rather the 
functions of the metonymic search for mother-substitutes as 
objects of desire and metaphoric identifications made in the
father's name.  And when such metaphoric identifications 
break down or are refused ("foreclosed"), according to 
Lacan, the result is a predominantly metonymic form of 
desire no longer structured by the nuclear family or any 
other stable code, but mobilized by the infinite semiosis of
language as a purely abstract signifying system devoid of 
meaning: schizophrenia.  From the perspective of 
schizoanalysis, however, such a radically *un*structured 
form of desire constitutes not a clinical case or exception 
to the norm, but the very historical rule or tendency of 
capitalism; schizophrenia becomes the absolute horizon (or 
"limit") of social (dis)order and psychic functioning, 
produced by the de-coding processes of the market.^8^

[10]      My claim is that Baudelaire can be added as a fourth 
term in the series of parallels linking Freud with Luther 
and Adam Smith: because for Baudelairean modernism, 
aesthetic value is found not in the objects of poetic 
appropriation, but in the activity of poetic appropriation
itself--whence the oxymoron in the title of his major 
collection (_The Flowers of Evil_) and his claim to be able 
to extract modernist poetry from absolutely anything--from 
Evil, from sheer boredom (spleen), or even from mud (as he 
says).^9^  Abandoning and indeed actively rejecting the 
fixed values imposed in the Symbolic Order, Baudelaire opts 
instead for a metonymic poetics that approaches the infinite
semiosis of a completely de-coded Symbolic register.  In the
modernity that Baudelaire was among the first to diagnose, 
value--religious, economic, libidinal, poetic value--
does not inhere in objects, but is subjectively (and even 
schizophrenically) bestowed.  Baudelaire is thus in an 
important sense the Martin Luther-Adam Smith-Sigmund Freud 
of poetry, an early champion of de-coding within poetry and 
aesthetics, and one representative of a world-historical 
transformation in this field just as Luther, Smith, and 
Freud were in theirs.  (There is another, less flattering 
sense in which Baudelaire represents the Luther-Smith-Freud 
of poetry, however, to which I will return below.) 

[11]      It is this figure of Baudelaire as epitomizing a
crucial turning-point in the history of Western culture at
the emergence of modernism that the notion of de-coding
enables us to recover from the so-called "rhetorical" school
of deconstructive criticism.  Members of this school--I am 
thinking in particular of Barbara Johnson, and her ground-
breaking readings of matched pairs of Baudelaire poems^10^--
were among the first to see important epistemological or 
ideological implications in the Jakobsonian distinction 
between metaphor and metonymy, when one or the other aspect 
of discourse predominates in a given literary text.  In 
comparing verse and prose versions of the same poem, Johnson
argued that metaphoric discourse--predominating in the 
verse poems--represents delusory adherence to the 
metaphysics of identity, while metonymic discourse--
predominating in the prose poems--entails heroic 
acknowledgment of uncertainty, contingency, and flux.  But 
this seminal insight is then immediately recontained as an 
undecidable binary opposition--metaphor and metonymy are 
legible in both verse and prose, she insists--lest it open 
onto the historical conclusion that Baudelaire's poetics 
evolved from predominantly metaphoric to predominantly 
metonymic, and that this evolution aligns with his rejection
of romanticism and the turn to modernism. 

[12]      This strategy of containment is based on a misreading
of Jakobson--who would surely have been very unhappy to hear
the rigorous distinction he proposed between metaphor and 
metonymy considered "undecidable."  According to Jakobson, 
the metaphoric axis of discourse is based on the identity or
equivalence among terms as defined by the storehouse of the 
language-system functioning "in absentia" (as Saussure put 
it) "outside" the linear time of utterance.  The metonymic 
axis, by contrast, sustains the process of combining 
different terms contiguously to form a chain of 
signification "within" time--that is, in the duration of 
utterance.  The metaphoric axis is thus a function of the 
language-system, and appears to exist as a given, outside of
time, in contrast to the metonymic axis which is precisely 
the sequentiality of actual discourse as it is produced in 
context and through time.  Jakobson thus concludes that 
every sign used in discourse has "two sets of 
interpretants . . . the code and the context."^11^  And we
may surmise that when one set of interpretants diminishes in
strength or importance, the other set will come to the fore.

[13]      This is precisely what happens in Baudelaire: 
metaphoric poetics predominates in the early poetry, but
gives way to metonymic poetics in the later poetry.  The
single Baudelaire poem everyone is likely to be most
familiar with--"Correspondences"--is, ironically enough, the
very poem *against which* nearly everything he later wrote
is directed; it sums up a metaphoric poetics of romanticism 
expressing the harmonies enveloping man in nature outside of
society and time--and it is this romantic poetics that is 
virulently rejected by Baudelairean modernism, where 
metonymic reference to the present moment and context 
prevail, instead.  

[14]      "Correspondences" appears in an introductory group of 
poems that treat the relation between the misunderstood 
artist and his philistine society: the ungainly poet is 
cruelly taunted by uncomprehending humanity in "The 
Albatross," while in "Elevation" he soars high above the 
mortifying world of earthly existence and "effortlessly 
understands/ The language of flowers and all silent things" 
(lines 19-20).  Such inspired communion with nature becomes 
the subject of the well-known fourth poem of the cycle, 
"Correspondences," whose title and first phrase ("Nature is 
a temple . . .") depict nature as a realm of equivalences 
between the divine and the human, a realm where everything 
ultimately appears to be just like everything else.  The 
poem's insistent use of metaphor and simile promotes a 
poetic vision able to unite interior and exterior, essence 
and appearance into an organic whole. 

[15]      In the opening poem of the following cycle, "Beauty," 
things are very different.  Where "Correspondences" abounds
in metaphorical figures of equivalence, transparency, and 
wholeness, "Beauty" insists instead on metonymical figures 
of exteriority, mechanical causality, and comparisons of 
degree.  The temptations of metaphor and simile are 
proferred, but ultimately refused, as the poem dictates a 
very different form of poetic investigation.  The simile of 
the poem's first line ("I am beautiful, o mortals, like a 
dream of stone") is a case in point: a resemblance is 
proposed, but in terms so bewildering as to obscure the 
comparison they are supposed to serve.  For what is so 
beautiful about a dream made of stone, or a dream about 
stone?  We may be tempted to posit statuary as an 
interpretant for this opening simile: but then why does 
Beauty-as-statue inspire in poets a love that is "eternally 
mute, like matter" (line 4), as the closing simile of the 
first stanza puts it?  A poetically fruitful comparison 
would surely not silence poets, who of all people should be 
able to give it voice. 

[16]      The opening simile of the second stanza reinforces
these perplexities, by comparing beauty with a sphinx that
is "incomprehensible" (line 5).  And the strange
juxtaposition in the next line ("I combine a heart of snow
with the whiteness of swans" line 6) demonstrates how
misleading external appearances may be: the swans'
whiteness, suggesting innocence and purity, covers a
snowy-white heart of coldness and cruelty.  By the time we
reach the third stanza, correspondences between inside and
outside have become completely undeterminable and
appearances evidently deceiving: the poets remain transfixed
by what Beauty calls her "grand poses" (%grandes attitudes%,
line 9), but are completely unable to determine their
authenticity.  She appears, she says (line 10), to have
borrowed them from the proudest monuments: if she has
borrowed them, are they really hers?  And if she hasn't
borrowed them, then why is she pretending to?  No wonder the
poets' love remains eternally mute: their metaphors prove
unable to determine Beauty's true inner nature. 

[17]      Yet it turns out that the inaccessibility of Beauty's 
essence enables her actual effectivity in the last stanza 
of the poem: 
For I have, to fascinate those docile admirers,
Pure mirrors that render everything more beautiful:
My eyes, my immense eyes of eternal light!  (12-14)
Her identity lost in questionable comparisons of 
metaphorical *equivalence*, Beauty's effects on things are 
henceforth measured in metonymical comparisons of degree: 
she renders things *more* beautiful.  It is not through 
essences that Beauty reaches poets, but through things; not 
by relations of interiority and transparency, but of 
exteriority and mechanical causality.  Denied access by the 
"pure mirrors [of] her eyes" to Beauty's essence, the poets 
remain fascinated by proliferating images of the more and 
more beautiful things illuminated by them.^12^

[18]      Defying metaphoric appropriation and totalizing 
expression, Beauty is henceforth to be appreciated through 
her incremental effects on the external world.  And indeed, 
in the subsequent poems of the cycle (especially "The Mask" 
and "Hymne to Beauty," which Baudelaire added to the second 
edition of the collection), Beauty appears only in fragments
and random images, valued not for her (or as an essence),
but for her contingent impact on the poet.  This metonymic
poetics intensifies in the "Spleen" poems at the end of the
first section of the collection, and reaches its zenith in
the "Parisian Tableaus" section, with its insistent
reference to scenes of Second Empire Paris, despite the
agonizing inability to confer meaning on those scenes.  The
de-coding of metaphor, meaning, and identity thus fosters
not sheer meaninglessness, "undecidability," or the abyss,
but rather metonymic reference to context--even if such
reference must at the limit forgo any claim to stable
meaning.^13^ 

[19]      The poetics of metaphor and metonymy in Baudelaire 
therefore do not represent the poles of an undecidable 
binary opposition, but terms in an historical evolution from
romanticism to modernism.  Moreover, Baudelaire's poetry 
does not merely reflect the processes of de-coding 
characteristic of modern capitalist society, it actively 
participates in them.  It is true, of course, that 
Baudelaire's life-span corresponds to the take-off period of
modern French capitalism, with the banking elite coming to 
power in 1830, followed by the influx of Californian and 
Australian gold in 1849, and the founding of the first 
investment banks and the unification of markets by the rail 
system under Napoleon III in the 1850s and 60s.  But even 
more important was Baudelaire's personal investment in 
romantic-socialist hopes for the Revolution of 1848, which 
was to crown the revolutionary tradition by finally bringing
true workers' democracy to France.  For when the radical-
democratic ideals of 1848 are crushed by the %coup d'etat% 
of Napoleon in 1851, Baudelaire (among many others) responds
by actively repudiating his adherence to those ideals and 
adopting instead a stance of cynical disdain for modern 
culture and society.  Baudelaire's modernism emerges here, 
as defensive repudiation of the romantic enthusiasm he once 
shared for the figures of nature, woman, and the people.  So
in this literary-critical context, the introduction of the 
notion of de-coding transforms the deconstructive binary 
opposition metaphor/metonymy into a historical matrix for 
understanding the emergence of modernism in Baudelaire as 
the metonymic de-coding of romantic metaphoricity in revenge
for the shattered hopes and ideals of 1848. 

[20]      Central to Baudelaire's evolution from romanticism to 
modernism is his notorious masochism, about which so much 
has been written (mostly from various psychoanalytic 
perspectives).^14^  Schizoanalysis will insist upon 
transforming masochism from a psychological into a socio-
historical category, situating it in the period following 
the failures of the 1848 revolutions, when the literary 
works and essays of the "original" masochist, Leopold von 
Sacher-Masoch, were so popular throughout Europe.  Here I 
refer to Deleuze's study of Masoch, although it predates 
schizoanalysis and uses the discipline-bound terms "de-
sexualization" and "re-sexualization" in place of de-coding 
and re-coding.^15^  To derive the specificity of real 
masochism from Masoch's own literary oeuvre, Deleuze draws 
on the Freud of _Beyond the Pleasure Principle_, which 
explores the relationship between pleasure and repetition: 
what lies "beyond" the pleasure principle is not so much 
exceptions to it, but rather its grounding in repetition and
the death instinct.  Under the influence of the death 
instinct, even the pleasure-principle becomes, as Freud put 
it, "innately conservative": repetition grounds the 
stimulus-binding energy that links present perception with 
memory-traces of past gratification, thus enabling the 
pleasure-principle to operate and govern behavior.  Usually,
repetition and pleasure work hand-in-glove: we repeat what 
has previously been found pleasurable, which is to say that 
present perception is eroticized or "sexualized" and 
governed "conservatively" by memories of gratifications 
past.  

[21]      But the relation of pleasure and repetition can vary: 
less usually, as in the case of trauma dreams, for instance,
repetition operates independently of the pleasure-principle,
"de-sexualizing" perception and repeating something not 
pleasurable, but extremely displeasurable, something 
traumatic.  Here repetition is severed from drive-
gratification, and serves instead as an ego-defense to 
reduce anxiety, by developing %ex post facto% the stimulus-
binding recognition-function whose absence occasioned the 
trauma in the first place.  Still less usually, as in the 
case of perversion, the de-sexualization of perception is 
*accompanied by the re-sexualization of repetition itself*: 
instead of repeating what was initially found pleasurable, 
pleasure is derived from whatever is repeated.  Now we might
well expect desperate measures for reducing anxiety to 
proliferate in a de-coded Symbolic Order, which no longer 
protects the psyche from traumatic stimuli by binding them 
according to established codes of meaning.  But the question
remains: how can the repetition of pain, of all things--
and especially one's own pain--reduce anxiety and 
procure pleasure?  Here, Deleuze invokes the conclusion of 
Reik's clinical study of masochism: accepting punishment for
the desired act before it occurs effectively resolves guilt 
and anxiety about the act, thereby sanctioning its 
consummation.^16^  But he then goes on to ask, why would 
preliminary punishment serve the end of obtaining pleasure? 
Under what conditions does this masochistic narrative-kernel
(punishment-before -> pleasure-after) become effective?  
This is where analysis of Masoch's fiction proves 
illuminating. 

[22]      Masoch's hero typically arranges a mock contract 
according to which he willingly suffers regular and 
systematic domination and punishment at the hands of a 
beautiful woman.  The functions of this fantasy-contract are
several: first of all, it reduces anxiety about punishment 
by meticulously specifying when, where, and how such 
punishment is to be carried out; secondly, it explicitly 
excludes the Father, the usual authority-figure, and 
transfers his Symbolic authority to the woman; then, by 
actively soliciting punishment, the contract invalidates 
the Symbolic authority responsible for the suffering 
incurred: since the punishment is undeserved, blame falls on
the figure meting it out, instead.  With the Father-figure 
excluded and his authority denied, the masochist hero ends 
up enjoying relations with the woman which the Father 
normally prohibits.  In the context of mid-19th century 
France, this fantasy-scenario presents an allegory of the 
anti-authoritarian ideals of 1848, with the de-coding of the
Father-figure in Louis-Philippe accompanied by re-coding on 
the Mother-figure of Marianne and the Second Republic. 

[23]      Yet, in a way Deleuze does not fully appreciate, the 
masochistic *scenario* just described is in Masoch's fiction
embedded *within a narrative* that produces results very 
different from the utopian ideal projected by the contract. 
In Masoch's stories, the Father-figure supposedly excluded 
from the fantasy-contract suddenly re-appears, and is in 
fact joined by the woman in administering new forms of 
torture that exceed and thus break the terms of the 
contract.  So at the end of Masoch's stories, the 
masochistic fantasy-scenario crumbles, leaving the hero with
a galling sense of having been duped and a bitter desire for
revenge.  And the ex-masochist hero in Masoch's stories 
indeed takes his revenge, with a ferocity bordering on 
sadism.  The conclusion of Masochian *narrative* thus 
represents not the anti-authoritarian utopia of idealized 
relations with the ideal Mother-figure, as pictured in the 
masochistic *scenario*, but rather a vitriolic and often 
violent cynic who now despises anyone (even or most of all 
himself) foolish enough to have taken his ideals and desires
for reality.  Such is the story that Masoch told--and that 
his innumerable readers throughout late-19th century Europe 
read--over and over and over again: as in a trauma-dream, 
this compulsion to repeat represents defensive preparation 
for a cataclysmic event...that has already occurred.  
And for Baudelaire, as for so many of his French 
contemporaries, the real event that represents as it were 
the return of the Father ruining the Mother-and-son's anti-
authoritarian utopia, is the incredible rise to power and 
%coup d'etat% of Napoleon III, the founding of the 
authoritarian Second Empire on the ruins of the democratic 
Second Republic.  

[24]      What's more, anyone familiar with biographies of 
Baudelaire will recognize this story of the return-of-the-
Father destroying the Mother-and-son's idyllic utopia as a 
*repetition*, from Baudelaire's own childhood, of his 
mother's remarriage to an ambitious young military officer 
several years after the death of Baudelaire's real father: 
this uncanny "coincidence" is for schizoanalysis what made 
Baudelaire the lyric poet of his age, to paraphrase Walter
Benjamin.  In schizoanalytic terms, then, "masochism" is not
the name of a psychological category, but a historical 
strategy for de-coding social authority while transforming 
romantic idealism into the disillusioned cynicism of 
modernism. 

[25]      This is not to say that the evolution from romanticism
to modernism in Baudelaire can be understood as some kind of
linear progression from metaphor to metonymy: metaphor 
doesn't simply disappear, but reappears in Baudelairean 
modernism transformed by metonymization into a corrosive 
irony.^17^  Our account of the de-coding of modernism in 
Baudelaire, meanwhile, remains still too abstract as long as
metonymy as a free form of desire induced by the market and 
metonymization as a formal development of Baudelairean 
poetics are linked by mere parallelism: Lacan's and 
Johnson's quite different transformations of Jakobson's 
concept of metonymy must be completed and brought to bear on
the evolution of Baudelairean poetics as a whole (not 
restricted to individual poems or pairs of poems, as in 
Johnson and in Jakobson himself).  Here, Walter Benjamin's 
own historicization of psychoanalysis via a reading of 
Baudelaire constitutes an invaluable point of departure.  
What Benjamin saw was that Baudelaire's best poetry was 
formulated as a defense against the traumatic shocks typical
of urban life in the de-coded Symbolic Order of nascent 
capitalism.  Baudelaire's shock-defense takes two forms, 
which correspond to the title of the well-known first 
section of _The Flowers of Evil_, "Spleen and Ideal."  
"Ideal" designates a metaphoric defense that re-codes 
potentially traumatic experience in the nostalgic terms of a
lost yet rememorable harmony with nature outside of time (as
in "Former Life," for example); "Spleen" designates a 
metonymic defense that defuses potential trauma simply by 
locating an experience as precisely as possible in time (see
"The Clock")--though at the cost, Benjamin suggests, of 
robbing it of any lyric content.^18^

[26]      As invaluable as it is, Benjamin's reading overlooks
the importance of the prose poem collection and even of the 
"Tableaux Parisiens" section added after "Spleen and Ideal" 
to the second edition of _The Flowers of Evil_--where a 
very different form of poetics and response to market de-
coding prevail.  What Benjamin didn't see is that cycles of 
protective re-coding alternate with cycles of exhilarated 
de-coding in the verse collection, as the poet alternately 
seeks out and then withdraws from contact with the Real.  
Nor was he able to appreciate the way in which the 
predominance of metonymic poetics transforms the cycles of
de-coding and re-coding in the verse collection into 
*simultaneous* re-coding and de-coding in the individual 
poems of the prose collection, as the high-anxiety trauma 
and shock-defenses of earlier work give way in the later 
work to a very different defense based on psychic splitting.

[27]      Historically speaking, once ambient de-coding reaches a
certain threshold of intensity, whatever stability and 
coherence the ego may have possessed dis-integrate, and the 
unstable, split subjectivity of so-called borderline 
conditions replaces oedipal neurosis as the predominant form
of psychological disturbance--as nearly all the post-
Freudian psychoanalytic literature from Fenichel to Kristeva
and Kernberg attests.^19^  But in the case of Baudelaire, 
who after all experienced de-coding at a considerably 
earlier stage of capitalist development, there had to have 
been a precipitating cause for severe splitting: it was, as 
I have suggested, his experience of Napoleon's %coup 
d'etat%, which shook Baudelaire's psychic structure to its 
foundations and propelled him from a relatively stable 
romanticism, through masochism, and into the supremely 
flexible, if not indeed self-contradictory, borderline 
condition characteristic of his modernism.^20^  Borderline 
conditions by themselves, however (and regardless of the 
degree to which Baudelaire "actually" lived or "merely" 
staged them in his poetry^21^), are not sufficient to 
account for Baudelairean modernism; there had to have been 
some figure to serve as ego-ideal around which a new, post-
romantic personality could form, in order to sustain and 
sanction the enduring ambitions of Baudelaire the writer: 
this figure, it turns out, was Edgar Allan Poe.  
Identification with Poe as a fellow writer shunned by 
contemporary society fosters a narcissistic reaction to the 
underlying borderline condition, so that the extreme 
instability and psychic splitting characteristic of the 
latter become a new form of defense. 

[28]      This is the stance that emerges in the "Parisian 
Tableaus" section of the second edition of _The Flowers of 
Evil_; it is epitomized in "The Game" ("Le Jeu"), in which 
the poet sees himself in a dream sitting off in a corner at
a gambling-house, silently watching the players and whores 
feverishly pursuing their ends, and is shocked that he 
actually envies them their "tenacious passion":

I saw myself, off in a corner of the grim gambling-den,
Leaning on my elbows, silent, cold, and envious,

Envying the gamblers their tenacious passion,
The old whores their dismal gaiety.
And all of them cheerfully selling, right in front of me,
One, his long-held honor, the other her good looks!

And my heart was alarmed at my envy of these poor souls
Racing zealously toward the gaping abyss,
Who, drunk with their own passion, in the end all liked
Pain better than death and hell better than nothingness!
(15-24)

Not only is the poet only an observer within the dream 
(lines 15-16), but he then takes his distance from this 
dream-self, cynically demystifying in waking consciousness 
the very passions he envied in the dream (lines 21-24). 

[29]      Such splitting appears even more starkly in the figure
of the prose poem narrator, for whom it serves to establish
a more or less comfortable distance from scenes of former 
selves in degraded commercial context--former selves 
(romantic idealists, most notably) who have been split off 
from the observing narrator yet retain a certain fascination
as objects of his rapt attention and of poetic 
depiction.^22^  This narrative stance is most clearly 
illustrated in "Loss of a halo," where the de-coding of 
romantic views of the poet's vocation, already accomplished 
on the level of poetics in "Beauty," has become an explicit 
prose theme.  In a brothel, the narrator runs into an 
acquaintance who expresses surprise at finding the 
illustrious poet in such a %mauvais lieu%.  The poet 
immediately launches into a long explanation of why he is 
there: while dodging on-coming traffic on his way across the
boulevard, his halo dropped in the mud; not having the 
courage to retrieve it, he decided it would be better to 
lose his insignia than to break his neck.  Then, looking on 
the bright side, he realized he could now "stroll about 
incognito, do nasty things, and indulge in vulgar behavior 
just like ordinary mortals."  The acquaintance expects him 
to advertise to get his halo back, but the poet will have 
none of it: dignity bores him, and now he gets to enjoy 
himself.  Besides, he imagines the fun he will have if some
scribbler picks it up and dares to put it on: "What a 
pleasure to make someone happy!--especially someone who 
would make me laugh!  Think of X, or Z!  Wouldn't that be 
droll!"  Here we see the narrator exercising an invidious 
superiority over his interlocutor and other writers who 
still believe in the "aura" of an older, romantic version of
the poet, one the narrator has left behind. 

[30]      But this sense of superiority, it turns out, was not a 
given but an achievement, and was in fact achieved at the 
expense of Baudelaire himself in an earlier incarnation.  
For the journal anecdote on which the poem is based reads 
very differently from the published version: here, the 
narrator does recover the halo, and still values it highly
enough to consider even its momentary loss a bad omen.^23^  
The lost halo, in this light, would be precisely the one 
awarded the romantic poet of "Benediction" for his suffering
at the beginning of _The Flowers of Evil_.  This idealistic 
self has in the final version completely disappeared beneath
the narrator's cynicism, having been projected onto X, Z, 
and the interlocutor, all of whom continue to value the 
outmoded ideal.  Moreover, the loss of the halo is now not 
merely the subject of a story: it is an event recounted by a
narrator to a listener within the poem; it has become an 
occasion for the narrator to attain a position of 
superiority over his fictional audience.  And he is now at 
one remove from the experience: Baudelaire has transmuted 
the original account and the uneasy feeling it provoked into
the snide banter of a world-weary and slightly sullied roue,
and in the process utterly rejected the romantic ideal of 
the poet he himself once espoused, if not embodied.  Such a 
position of serene indifference or actual disdain for 
cultural ideals characterizes Baudelairean modernism at its 
apogee.  And yet...and yet.... 

[31]      And yet there are at least two senses in which 
Baudelaire's prose poem collection goes far beyond the split
stance of the modernism adumbrated in the "Tableaux 
Parisiens"--far enough, perhaps, to attain a certain 
postmodernism.  For one thing, although Baudelaire's 
identification with Poe as martyr to a philistine society 
was supposed to elevate him above the crass world of 
commerce and mass-democratic society, the modernist poetics 
he developed turned out to be strictly complicitous with the
capitalist market.  By locating aesthetic value solely in 
the *activity* of poetic appropriation and distancing 
himself from the objects of that appropriation, Baudelaire 
comes to occupy the position of what Jacques Attali calls 
the "designer" or "programmer," whose basic function within 
capitalism is to endow more or less worthless objects (such 
as "designer-jeans") with semiotic surplus-value in order to
enable the realization of economic surplus-value by 
promoting their purchase by consumers; the most familiar 
form of programming, in other words, is advertising.^24^  
This is the second sense in which Baudelaire can be 
considered the Martin Luther/Adam Smith/Sigmund Freud of 
poetry, for each of these figures, too, re-imposed a moment 
of re-coding on the radical indeterminacy of de-coding, 
according to Deleuze and Guattari: Luther re-codes pure 
religiosity onto Scripture; Adam Smith re-codes abstract 
labor-power onto capital; Freud re-codes polymorphous libido
onto the Oedipus complex.  Baudelaire, similarly, re-codes 
an increasingly metonymic poetics onto the prose poem 
narrator-as-programmer.  

[32]      Inasmuch as Baudelaire's mature poetics functions in
this way to valorize from the re-coded perspective of the 
borderline-narcissist narrator various forms of de-coded 
experience that have been distanced or rendered virtually 
meaningless in themselves, it acts in complicity with and 
even as a prototype for the kinds of debased commercial 
activity modernism was to have rejected and risen above.  
And this is a complicity that Baudelaire himself 
acknowledges in the prose poem entitled "The Cake," where 
inflated rhetoric endows a nearly worthless scrap of bread 
with so much semiotic surplus-value that it becomes the 
prized object of a fratricidal war.^25^  Such recognition of
the ultimate inseparability of high and low culture, of 
aesthetics and marketing, has become a hallmark of what we 
today call the postmodern condition--in large part because 
modernist "defamiliarization" has indeed become the all too 
familiar marketing strategy Baudelaire "foresaw" it could, 
now used for selling everything from standard-brand beer to 
%haute couture% perfume. 

[33]      And yet it must be said at the same time that
Baudelaire never whole-heartedly adopts the aloof and
superior position of the modernist programmer: an abiding
sympathy for his idealistic former selves remains a central
feature of the prose poem collection, visible in the
narrator's recurring shock of recognition that the poor
victims of commerce and philistinism he has been watching
from a distance are none other than the poet himself. 
Nowhere in the prose poem collection is this more poignantly
depicted than in "The Old Clown," in which the narrator
happens across an aged carnival clown sitting alone, ignored
by the joyous throngs surrounding him.  While observing him,
the narrator suddenly "feels his throat wrung by the
terrible hand of hysteria," and when he tries to "analyze
[his] sudden grief," he realizes he has just seen an image
of "the aging man of letters who has outlived the generation
he had so brilliantly amused; [an image] of the old poet
bereft of friends, family, children, worn out by poverty and
the public's ingratitude"--an image, that is to say, of his
very self.  Whereas the narrator of poems such as "Loss of a
halo" (and "The Projects") manages to retain or quickly 
regain his composure in the face of former selves, defensive
splitting in many other poems (including "A Heroic Death" as
well as "The Old Clown") fails abruptly, putting the 
narrator back into agonzing contact with romantic ideals 
that are alive in memory despite their historical defeat 
(which is the theme of the prose poem entitled "Which one is
the true one?").^26^ 

[34]      To be sure, there is a tendency in Baudelaire to 
repudiate the romantic narrative of French history as 
progress toward social democracy in the name of modernism, a
tendency to transform erstwhile idealism into pure cynicism.
What could be more cynical than to capitalize on the defeat 
of one's ideals by adopting the position of programmer and 
contributing to the realization of surplus-value, including 
and especially one's own?  Such borderline-narcissist 
cynicism, incidentally, is precisely the stance of 
Baudelaire's current-day, American avatar, Madonna, who acts
out degraded split-off selves who she knows will shock and 
sell, but always from an ironic distance that leaves her 
integrity as programmer and her command of a share of the 
profits intact.^27^  But Baudelaire, it seems to me, never 
quite occupies such a position.  And this is not just 
because (as Bataille reminds us^28^) he represents in 
material terms a colossal failure as the "lyric poet of high
capitalism"--unlike Madonna.  It is because, however much 
Baudelaire repudiates narrative and history, he never 
manages to completely hide his profound sympathy and lasting
identification with the victims of the capitalist market: he
never fully occupies the modernism he himself invented. 

[35]      Is such identification with the victims on Baudelaire's
part a mere vestige of his erstwhile romanticism?  
Biographically speaking, perhaps so.  But I would argue that
it becomes available or interesting to us under specifically
postmodern conditions, when we become willing or able to see
more in Baudelaire than the invention of modernism for which
he has been canonized.  Surely his recognition of the 
potential of modernist poetry for market programming has 
little enough to do with romanticism, and everything to do 
with postmodernism today.  In any case, the anti-
universalizing and anti-individualist principles of 
schizoanalysis suggest a version of literary reception 
theory (akin to Benjamin's "redemptive" literary history) 
according to which a process of socio-historical rather than
narrowly psychological transference will make certain 
features of a literary work become visible when changed 
circumstances bring one historical moment into unexpected 
alignment with another.^29^  In this light, as our 
postmodernism rejoins Baudelaire's pre- and/or post-
modernism by means of such historical transference, 
modernism appears in between as an attempt to capitalize on 
market reification itself, with its segregation of formal 
innovation in the restricted sphere of high culture from 
homogenizing repetition in the general cultural sphere, as a
vehicle or opportunity for aesthetic development.^30^  And 
it would appear by now that this attempt has, if not failed 
in some simple and total way, then certainly run its course,
accomplished all that it can--and is therefore being 
surpassed. 

[36]      Antonio Negri has, to my mind, proposed the most acute
way to situate this historical reconstruction of the
relation between the premodern, modern, and postmodern in a
figure such as Baudelaire: in terms of the difference
between merely formal subsumption and real subsumption of
labor by capital.^31^  If, as Marx said, society sets itself
only the tasks it is able to accomplish, then we may
understand the kinds of formal freedom and equality
associated with romanticism, the sovereign individual, and
representative democracy, along with the kinds of formal
innovation associated with modernism, as historically
necessary and indeed fruitful stages in the development of
modern culture, but stages which have by now been
superceded, as the full socialization of production under
conditions of real subsumption renders the individual
romantic subject obsolete, and calls for new developments in
collective freedom, substantive equality, and general
cultural innovation alike.  In this light, "The Voyage" (the
concluding poem of the second edition of _The Flowers of 
Evil_) might be understood to prefigure, in its insistence 
on the value of unending travel for its own sake, the notion
of permanent revolution as it appears on the historical 
horizon once capitalism has exhausted all of its positive 
potential--and more specifically to prefigure, in its 
strategic use of the anti-lyrical, plural personal pronoun 
"we" throughout, the kind of collective nomadism on a new 
earth that Deleuze and Guattari envisage in the _Anti-
Oedipus_ as the next stage of social development.^32^ 

-----------------------------------------------------------------

NOTES 

^1^ Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, _The
Anti-Oedipus_ (New York: Viking, 1977) and _Qu'est-ce que
la philosophie?_ (Paris: Minuit, 1991). 

^2^ On the differences between philosophical concepts
and scientific "functives" (%fonctifs%), see Chapter 5 of 
_Qu'est-ce que la philosophie?_.  While not Deleuze and 
Guattari's own, I have found the term "transformers" useful 
for capturing the operational value of Deleuzo-Guattarian 
concepts; so has Reda Bensma, in "Les transformateurs-
Deleuze ou le cinema comme automate spirituel,"
forthcoming. 

^3^ This would be the "utopian" dimension of the 
philosophical concepts deployed in the _Anti-Oedipus_, 
according to _Qu'est-ce que la philosophie?_ (95). 

^4^ On the relations of the _Anti-Oedipus_ to May 68,
see my "Schizoanalysis: the Postmodern Contextualization of 
Psychoanalysis" in _Marxism and the Interpretation of 
Culture_, Nelson and Grossberg, eds. (Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 1988), 405-416, esp. 415.  For a fuller 
treatment than is possible here of the evolution of 
Baudelairean poetics from the perspective of schizoanalysis,
see my _Baudelaire and Schizoanalysis: the Sociopoetics of 
Modernism_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993). 

^5^ On the concept of friend and concepts as friends,
see _Qu'est-ce que la philosophie?_, 8-10 and Chapter 3,
"Les personnages conceptuels".  On "milieu," see Gilles
Deleuze and Claire Parnet, _Dialogues_ (Paris: Flammarion,
1977), 69 and passim; and _Qu'est-ce que la philosophie?_,
94-96. 

^6^ The _Anti-Oedipus_, 271. 

^7^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "The Communist 
Manifesto" in _Marx and Engels: Basic Writings on Politics 
and Philosophy_, Lewis Feuer, ed. (Garden City: Doubleday, 
1959) 6-41; the quotation is from p.10.                     

^8^ The _Anti-Oedipus_, 176-77; for a similar
discussion of the relation between philosophy and the limits
of capitalism, see _Qu'est-ce que la philosophie?_, 92-97. 

^9^ "I have kneaded mud and made it into gold" (my 
translation), _Oeuvres Completes_ (Paris: Seuil, 1968), 763.

^10^ Barbara Johnson, _Defigurations du langage
poetique: la seconde revolution baudelairienne_ (Paris:
Flammarion, 1979), 31-55; and _The Critical Difference_
(Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980),
23-48. 

^11^ Roman Jakobson, "Two Aspects of Language and Two
Types of Aphasic Disturbance" in _Fundamentals of Language_
(with Morris Halle) (The Hague: Mouton, 1956), 67-96; the 
quotation is from page 75. 

^12^ For a more complete comparison of the poetics of 
"Correspondences" and "Beauty," see _Baudelaire and 
Schizoanalysis_, Chapter 2.

^13^ On the metonymic poetics of the "spleen" poems
and the "Parisian Tableaus," see _Baudelaire and
Schizoanalysis_, Chapters 3 and 5.  On metonymic or
"indexical" reference to context in Baudelairean modernism,
see Ross Chambers, _Melancolie et opposition: les debuts du
modernisme en France_ (Paris: Jose Corti, 1987). 

^14^ On Baudelaire's masochism, see Rene Laforgue, _The
Defeat of Baudelaire_ (London: Hogarth, 1932); Jean-Paul 
Sartre, _Baudelaire_ (Paris: Gallimard, 1947); and Leo 
Bersani, _Baudelaire and Freud_ (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1977). 

^15^ Gilles Deleuze, _Presentation de Sacher-Masoch_ 
(Paris: Minuit, 1967). 

^16^ Theodor Reik, _Masochism in Modern Man_ (New
York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1941). 

^17^ For another, quite different account of metaphor
in modernism, see David Lodge, _The Modes of Modern Writing:
Metaphor, Metonymy, and the Typology of Modern Literature_ 
(London: Edward Arnold, 1977); Lodge draws exclusively on 
Jakobson for his understanding of metaphor and metonymy, and
not at all on Lacan. 

^18^ Walter Benjamin, _Charles Baudelaire: A Lyric 
Poet in the Era of High Capitalism_ (London: Verso/New Left 
Books, 1973). 

^19^ Otto Fenichel, "Ego-Disturbances and their
Treatment," in _Collected Papers_, 2 Vols. (New York:
Norton, 1953-54), Vol. 2, 109-28; Otto Kernberg, _Borderline
Conditions and Pathological Narcissism_ (New York: Jason
Aronson, 1975); Julia Kristeva, "Within the Microcosm of
'The Talking Cure'," in _Interpreting Lacan_, Smith and
Kerrigan, eds., _Psychiatry and the Humanities_ Vol. 6 (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1983), 33-48. 

^20^ "With all the talk of rights these days, there's
one that everyone has forgotten about . . . the right to
contradict oneself" (my translation) _Oeuvres Completes_,
291.  On the contradictory nature of modernism, see Charles
Bernheimer, _Figures of Ill Repute: Representing
Prostitution in Nineteenth-Century France_ (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1989). 

^21^ As Leo Bersani put it, "I don't mean that
Baudelaire was psychotic when he wrote these poems; he does,
however, seem to have represented in them a psychotic
relation to the world."  _Baudelaire and Freud_ (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1977), 128. 

^22^ For a fuller discussion of narrative splitting in
a broader range of prose poems, see _Baudelaire and 
Schizoanalysis_, Chapters 6 and 7.

^23^ The anecdote is found in "Fusees" #11, _Oeuvres 
Completes_, 627. 

^24^ Jacques Attali, _Noise: the Political Economy of 
Music_ (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1985), 
esp. 128-32. 

^25^ For a more complete reading of "The Cake," see 
_Baudelaire and Schizoanalysis_, Chapter 7.

^26^ For discussions of "Which one is the true one?"
"A Heroic Death," and "The Projects" along these lines, see
_Baudelaire and Schizoanalysis_, Chapter 6. 

^27^ See David Tetzlaff, "Metatextual Girl: patriarchy
-> postmodernism -> power -> money -> Madonna," forthcoming;
and my "Baudelaire's Madonna and Ours," forthcoming.

^28^ See his essay on Baudelaire in _Literature and
Evil_ (London: Calder and Boyars, 1973). 

^29^ On "historical transference" of this kind, see
Benjamin's "Theses on the Philosophy of History," in
_Illuminations_, Hannah Arendt, ed. (New York: Schocken,
1969), 253-64; Michel de Certeau, _The Writing of History_
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1988); Dominick
LaCapra, _Soundings in Critical Theory_ (Ithaca: Cornell
University Press, 1989); and the preface to _Baudelaire and 
Schizoanalysis_. 

^30^ On the general and restricted spheres of culture,
see Pierre Bourdieu, _Distinction: a social critique of the 
judgment of taste_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1984). 

^31^ See Antonio Negri, _Marx Beyond Marx: Lessons on
the Grundrisse_ (New York: Bergin and Garvey, 1984); and
_The Politics of Subversion: A Manifesto for the
Twenty-First Century_ (London: Polity Press [Basil
Blackwell], 1989), especially Chapter 3, "From the mass
worker to the socialized worker--and beyond" and Chapter
13, "Postmodern." 

^32^ On the "new earth," see the _Anti-Oedipus_, 35,
131, 318-22, 367-82; and _Qu'est-ce que la philosophie?_,
95; on nomadism as permanent revolution, see my
"Schizoanalysis: the Postmodern Contextualization of
Psychoanalysis," esp. 407. 